[2201.9.0] Add test parallelisation  document (#8821)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/development-tutorials/test-document-the-code/test-ballerina-code/execute-tests-in-parallel.md

---
layout: ballerina-testing-code-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Execute tests in parallel
description: Learn how to execute tests in parallel.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, testing, test execution
permalink: /learn/test-ballerina-code/execute-tests-in-parallel/
active: execute-tests-in-parallel
intro: Ballerina test framework allows developers to execute test cases in parallel, which can significantly reduce the overall test execution time, especially for large codebases with a large number of test cases.
---

## Enable parallel execution of tests

Tests are executed serially by default. The user has to explicitly activate the parallel execution by providing the `--parallel` flag as follows.

> ```bash

Reviewer: Remove bash. If we put bash, the code will be evaluated as a bash script and will result in incorrect syntax highlighting.
```suggestion
```
```

bal test --parallel
```

> Before running tests concurrently, it's crucial to ensure concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently evaluates the concurrency safety of tests to some extent using a predefined set of rules. Tests that don't comply with these rules are executed sequentially, regardless of the parallel flag being enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before running tests concurrently, it is crucial to ensure concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently evaluates the concurrency safety of tests to some extent using a predefined set of rules. Tests that do not comply with these rules are executed sequentially, regardless of the parallel flag being enabled.
```

## Exclude a specific test from parallel execution

Certain tests may have dependencies or requirements that make them incompatible with parallel execution, such as shared resources or specific environment setups. If such a requirement is identified, the user may need to set the `serialExecution` flag to `true` as follows:

```ballerina
@test:Config {serialExecution: true}
function testAssertEquals6() {
    test:assertEquals(100, 100);
}
```

## Write a concurrent safe test case

> A set of rules must be followed while writing a parallel test.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be something like 

"The following conditions have to be met for a test to be identified as one that can be run in parallel."

> 1. The test function must be isolated. In some instances, the compiler infers the test functions as isolated automatically if there are sufficient conditions to make them concurrently safe.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The test function must be isolated. If the function is not exposed publicly and all the conditions for `isolated` functions are met, the compiler may infer the test functions as `isolated`.
```

Reviewer 3: May be add a link to isolated examples.

Author: I hope this is link you are mentioning https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/isolated-functions/

Reviewer 3: Meant more https://ballerina.io/learn/concurrency/#concurrency-safety or https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#concurrency-safety.

> 1) The test function should be isolated. In some instances, the compiler infers the test functions as isolated automatically if there are sufficient conditions to make them concurrently safe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The test function must be isolated. In some instances, the compiler infers the test functions as isolated automatically if there are sufficient conditions to make them concurrently safe.
```

> 2) If it is a data provider test, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If it is a data provider test, 
```

>    - The data provider of the test function should be isolated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - The data provider of the test function must be isolated.
```

>    - The test function parameters must be read-only type.

Reviewer 3: The types of the parameters have to be subtypes of `readonly`. I.e., only immutable values can be passed as arguments.

>    - The test function parameters must be read-only type.

Reviewer 3: Don't you check readonly or isolated object {}?

Author: We had an issue with isolated object{} arguments on passing them to an async call. So we decided to use read-only types.

>    - The test function parameters should be read-only type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - The test function parameters must be read-only type.
```

> 3) Respective set-up and tear-down functions (`before`, `after`, `BeforeEach`, `AfterEach`, `BeforeGroups`, `AfterGroups`) of the test function should be isolated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Respective set-up and tear-down functions (`before`, `after`, `BeforeEach`, `AfterEach`, `BeforeGroups`, `AfterGroups`) of the test function should be isolated.
```

A warning related to unparallelized tests is printed at the beginning of the parallel test execution with the reasons.
Consider the following example.

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.runtime;
import ballerina/test;

int a = 0;

@test:Config {
    dataProvider: mapDataProvider
}
function mapDataProviderTest(int value1, int value2, string fruit) returns error? {
    test:assertEquals(value1, value2, msg = "The provided values are not equal");
    runtime:sleep(0.1);
    a = 8;
}

function mapDataProvider() returns map<[int, int, string]>|error {
    a = 10;
    map<[int, int, string]> dataSet = {
        "banana": [10, 10, "banana"],
        "cherry": [5, 5, "cherry"],
        "apple": [5, 5, "apple"],
        "orange": [5, 5, "orange"]
    };
    return dataSet;
}
```

The above code results in the following warning.

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

WARNING: Test function 'mapDataProviderTest' cannot be parallelized, reason: non-isolated test function, non-isolated data-provider function
```

> Based on the warning, we can correct the code as follows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on the warning, the code can be improved as follows.
```

```
bal test --parallel
```

Before running tests concurrently, it is crucial to ensure concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently evaluates the concurrency safety of tests to some extent using a predefined set of rules. Tests that do not comply with these rules are executed sequentially, regardless of the parallel flag being enabled.

## Exclude a specific test from parallel execution

Certain tests may have dependencies or requirements that make them incompatible with parallel execution, such as shared resources or specific environment setups. If such a requirement is identified, the user may need to set the `serialExecution` flag to `true` as follows:

```ballerina
@test:Config {serialExecution: true}
function testAssertEquals6() {
    test:assertEquals(100, 100);
}
```

## Write a concurrent safe test case

The following conditions have to be met for a test to be identified as one that can be run in parallel.

1. The test function must be isolated. If the function is not exposed publicly and all the conditions for `isolated` functions are met, the compiler may infer the test functions as `isolated`. 
2. If it is a data provider test, 

>    - The data provider of the test function must be isolated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - The data provider of the test function must be isolated, either explicitly marked or inferred to be isolated.
```

   - The types of the test function parameters must be subtypes of `readonly`. I.e., only immutable values can be passed as arguments.
3. Respective set-up and tear-down functions (`before`, `after`, `BeforeEach`, `AfterEach`, `BeforeGroups`, `AfterGroups`) of the test function must be isolated.

To learn more about concurrency safety in Ballerina, see [Concurrency safety](https://ballerina.io/learn/concurrency/#concurrency-safety).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

---
layout: ballerina-testing-code-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Execute tests in parallel
description: Learn how to execute tests in parallel.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, testing, test execution
permalink: /learn/test-ballerina-code/execute-tests-in-parallel/
active: execute-tests
intro: The sections below include information about executing tests in parallel.
---

## Enable parallel execution of tests

> Tests are executed serially by default. User has to consciously enable the parallel execution by passing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tests are executed serially by default. The user has to explicitly activate the parallel execution by passing
```

Reviewer 5: instead of `by passing` , should we use `by providing`?

the `--parallel` flag as follows.

```bash
bal test --parallel
```

> Prior to executing tests concurrently, it is imperative to guarantee concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently assesses the concurrency safety of tests to a certain degree using a predefined set of rules. Tests failing to adhere to these rules are executed serially, notwithstanding the activation of the parallel flag.

Reviewer 6: Isn't the proper term "thread safety" here?

Author: It seems, we have used the term `concurrency-safe` in our documentation. 
Ref - https://ballerina.io/why-ballerina/concurrent/

> Prior to executing tests concurrently, it is imperative to guarantee concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently assesses the concurrency safety of tests to a certain degree using a predefined set of rules. Tests failing to adhere to these rules are executed serially, notwithstanding the activation of the parallel flag.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before running tests concurrently, it's crucial to ensure concurrency safety. Ballerina inherently evaluates the concurrency safety of tests to some extent using a predefined set of rules. Tests that don't comply with these rules are executed sequentially, regardless of the parallel flag being enabled.
```

## Exclude a specific test from parallel execution

> Tests can be flagged to be executed serially eventhough parallel execution is enabled. The common use case is when

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Tests can be flagged to be executed serially even though parallel execution is enabled. The common use case is when
```

> certain tests have dependencies or requirements that make them incompatible with parallel execution. Eg- Shared

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Certain tests may have dependencies or requirements that make them incompatible with parallel execution, such as shared resources or specific environment setups. If such a requirement is identified, the user may need to set the `serialExecution` flag to `true` as follows.```

> resource/ specific environment set-up. If such a requirment is identfied, User may need to set the `serialExecution`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
resource/ specific environment set-up. If such a requirement is identified, the user may need to set the `serialExecution`
```

flag to `true` as follows.

```ballerina
@test:Config {serialExecution: true}
function testAssertEquals6() {
    test:assertEquals(100, 100);
}
```

## Write a concurrent safe test case

> Following set of rules should be followed while writing a parallel test,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A set of rules should be followed while writing a parallel test,
```

> 1) Test function should be isolated. In some instances, compiler infer the test functions as isolated automatically if

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1) Test function should be isolated. In some instances, compiler infers the test functions as isolated automatically if
```

Reviewer 7: "*the* compiler *infers*" sounds more correct for me

> 1) Test function should be isolated. In some instances, compiler infer the test functions as isolated automatically if

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1) The test function should be isolated. In some instances, the compiler infers the test functions as isolated automatically if
```

>    there are sufficient conditions to make them concurrently safe.

Reviewer 5: why a line break here?

2) If it is a data provider test, 
   - The data provider of the test function should be isolated.
   - The test function parameters should be read-only type.

> 3) Respective set-up, and tear-down functions (before, after, before-each, after-each, before-group, after-group) of the test function should be isolated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3) Respective set-up and tear-down functions (before, after, before-each, after-each, before-group, after-group) of the test function should be isolated.
```

Reviewer 5: Also add each before, after, before-each, after-each, before-group, after-group within backticks?

> A warning related to unparallelized tests are printed at the beginning of the parallel test execution with the reasons.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A warning related to unparallelized tests is printed at the beginning of the parallel test execution with the reasons.
```

> Consider the following example,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Consider the following example.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.runtime;
import ballerina/test;

int a = 0;

@test:Config {
    dataProvider: mapDataProvider
}
function mapDataProviderTest(int value1, int value2, string fruit) returns error? {
    test:assertEquals(value1, value2, msg = "The provided values are not equal");
    runtime:sleep(0.1);
    a = 8;
}

function mapDataProvider() returns map<[int, int, string]>|error {
    a = 10;
    map<[int, int, string]> dataSet = {
        "banana": [10, 10, "banana"],
        "cherry": [5, 5, "cherry"],
        "apple": [5, 5, "apple"],
        "orange": [5, 5, "orange"]
    };
    return dataSet;
}
```

> The above code results following warning.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The above code will issue the following warning.
```

> The above code results following warning.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The above code results in the following warning.
```

```bash
WARNING: Test function 'mapDataProviderTest' cannot be parallelized, reason: non-isolated test function, non-isolated data-provider function
```

> Based on the warning, we can correct the code as follows,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Based on the warning, we can correct the code as follows.
```
